CelticCross
Card 1:   The present -- What is happening in the querent's mind, how they perceive their situation
Card 2:   The immediate challenge facing the querent. You will often pull a difficult card here, which will indicate an obstacle that must be overcome. When you pull a "good" card here, examine it carefully because it will still represent a challenge.
Card 3:   Distant past, foundation. This card should indicate the root of the subject matter of the question
Card 4:   More recent past, including events. This will indicate events taking place, not necessarily directly connected to the question. For example, if a love affair going wrong Card 3 would show the root of why it is going wrong, whereas Card 4 will show something that recently happened to reflect this. You could see this as a "check comment" card - a way of seeing that the reading is sound.
Card 5:   The best that can be achieved. This is directly related to the question. Note that this may not necessarily gel against Card 10 - it depends whether you are able to get the best. However, a negative card here probably means that it is worth cutting your losses rather than putting any more effort into the situation.
Card 6: Immediate Future. This indicates events in the next few days or week(s). This reading does not cover months.
Card 7: Factors or inner feelings affecting the situation. Compare this against Card 1 in order to understand underlying forces/trends. If there is conflict between them this tends to indicate that the querent is going in the wrong direction.
Card 8: External influences. People, energies or events which will affect the outcome of the question and are beyond the querent's control.
Card 9: Hopes or fears around the situation. This may produce a card that confuses us badly. Always bear in mind that hopes and fears are closely intertwined, therefore that which we hope for may also be that which we fear, and so may fail to happen. Sometimes it is useful to draw a second card for clarification after the reading has been laid, and to read the two together.
Card 10: Final outcome. This is a fairly self explanatory card. However it is worth saying that if the card comes up somewhat ambiguous, once again it may be worth drawing three extra cards to clarify. These should be interpreted through the lens of Card 10. So if the card drawn is the Tower and we draw the Ace of Cups, Princess of Cups and Four of Cups in a reading about a relationship, the Tower would indicate that it is time to move on. The Ace of Cup suggests that a new relationship is promised with better things ahead. The Princess of Cups brings new love (and possibly pregnancy). The Four of Cups shows deep levels of contentment and happiness, and many options for progress.
Card 1: The present. This card represents what is happening to the querent at the present time. It also reflects the querent’s state of mind and how they may be perceiving the situation.

Card 2: The challenge. This card represents the immediate challenge or problem facing the querent. This is the one thing that, if resolved, would make life a lot easier. Even if you draw a ‘positive’ card in this position, consider it carefully as it will still represent a challenge.

Card 3: The past. This card represents the events that have lead up to the present situation and may provide some indication of how the challenge came about.

Card 4: The future. This card represents what is likely to occur within the next few weeks or even months. This is not the final outcome, simply the next step on the journey.

Card 5: Above. This card reflects the querent’s goal, aspiration or best outcome with regards to the situation. It is what the querent is working towards consciously as they attempt to resolve the issue.

Card 6: Below. This card reflects that which is within the subconscious realm of the querent and delves much deeper into the core foundation of the situation. It symbolises the underlying feelings and trends associated with the situation and can indicate what is truly driving the querent. This card may bring a surprise message to the querent, particularly if they are not deeply connected to their inner being (watch out for reversed cards here which are likely to indicate that this is an ‘unknown’ to the querent).

Card 7: Advice. The advice card takes into account all that is happening within the querent’s life and presents a recommendation for what approach can be taken to address the current challenges.

Card 8: External influences.  This card highlights the people, energies or events which will affect the outcome of the question and are beyond the querent’s control.

Card 9: Hopes and/or fears. This is perhaps one of the most difficult positions to interpret. Keep in mind that hopes and fears are closely intertwined, therefore that which we hope for may also be that which we fear, and so may fail to happen. Sometimes it is useful to draw a second card for clarification after the reading has been laid and to read the two together.

Card 10: Outcome. This card is representative of where the situation is headed and if/how the issue will be resolved. It assumes the outcome based on the querent continuing their current course of action. Of course, if the outcome card is not a desirable outcome, it is within the free will of the querent to make the necessary changes to their situation.

*Note: There are many different versions of the Celtic Cross, including differences in the order of the cards. Choose what works best for you.

If you want to learn more about the positions of the Celtic Cross, I highly recommend Joan Bunning’s Celtic Cross overview.


Understanding the Inter-Relationships of the Celtic Cross

First, let’s imagine the Celtic Cross split into two main sections – the Circle/Cross section on the left (Cards 1 to 6) and the Staff section on the right (Cards 7 to 10).

The Circle/Cross shows what is going on in the querent’s life at the time of the reading. This section is made up of two crosses – a central one (Cards 1 and 2) nested within a larger cross (Cards 3 to 6). The smaller cross represents the heart of the matter – what is most central to the querent at the time of the reading. The larger cross consists of two lines that overlay the smaller cross. The horizontal line (Cards 1, 3 and 4)) shows time moving from the past on the left into the future on the right. The vertical line (Cards 1, 5 and 6) is the querent’s consciousness moving from unconscious on the bottom to conscious mind on the top. Together these six cards give a snapshot of the inner and outer environment at the time of a reading.

The Staff section shows the relationship between the querent and the environment in which they operate, and can provide a better indication of what is happening in the broader context.

Second, start to look at the various combinations of cards to build a ‘story’:

    Compare the Above and Below cards (Cards 5 and 6). Is there a synergy between the conscious and the subconscious levels? Is there alignment between what is driving the querent and what the querent aspires to? If there is alignment, great – it will be a lot easier to resolve the issue. If not, then assist the querent in understanding what is happening at the subconscious level and how this may be impacting their response to the issue.
    Compare the Above and Outcome cards (Cards 5 and 10). Again, is there alignment between what the querent wants to happen and what will happen? Is the querent helping or hindering the situation? If you find that Cards 5 and 10 are opposing, then the querent will need to think carefully about how to create the outcomes they want. Look to the Advice card (Card 7) for more guidance.
    Compare the Future and Outcomes cards (Cards 4 and 10). How are the events of the near future contributing or influencing the overall outcome? Will the querent need to manage these events in a particular way to create the right outcomes? Again, refer to the Advice card (Card 7) for more detail.
    Compare the Below and Hopes/Fears cards (Cards 6 and 9). If you are finding it difficult to interpret the Hopes/Fears, have a look at what is happening at the subconscious level within the querent (Card 6). Is there something in their subconscious realm that is creating fear or hope? If you see reversed cards in these positions, then it is likely the querent is not yet aware of their subconscious drivers and how this is impacting them in the ‘real world’.
    Compare the Advice and Outcome cards (Cards 7 and 10). The querent doesn’t like the outcome? Well, take a look at the Advice card to see what actions the querent can take to create a more positive outcome. Also take into consideration what events are likely to occur in the near future (Card 4) so that the querent can manage these effectively.




Five Card
Card 1:   The present or general theme of the reading
Card 2:   Past influences still having effect
Card 3:   The future
Card 4:   The reason behind the question (this will probably shed light on 2)
Card 5:   The potential within the situation.
This is a very useful spread when trying to decide a given course of action. Card 4 will often reveal a subconscious impulse - perhaps a blockage which is stopping you from achieving your desired result. Card 5 shows the possible results from taking a given course of action. The spread works best if, whilst selecting the cards, you concentrate on one aspect of the decision, rather than either/or type questions. 

Ellipse
Card 1:   Past influences now having bearing on the situation
Card 2:   Now - the influences surrounding you at the minute
Card 3:   Future influence having bearing
Card 4:   What to do
Card 5:   External influences having bearing
Card 6:   Hopes and fears
Card 7:  Final outcome of this situation.
I find Card 4 particularly useful, especially if you read it against the 'Working with' section. It allows you to get a handle on the things you need to be doing to help yourself in this situation now. 

Mirror
Card 1:   The querent.
Card 2:   The way you see the other person in the relationship.
Card 3:   The way they see themselves.
Card 4:   What the person represents to you.
Card 5:   What you represent to them.
Card 6:   Obstacles within the relationship.
Card 7:   Strengths within the relationship.
Card 8:   Probable result.

Mandala
Card 1:   The querent.
Card 2:   The way you see the other person in the relationship.
Card 3:   The way they see themselves.
Card 4:   What the person represents to you.
Card 5:   What you represent to them.
Card 6:   Obstacles within the relationship.
Card 7:   Strengths within the relationship.
Card 8:   Probable result.


Relationship
Card 1:   Distant past.
Card 2:   Recent past.
Card 3:   Now.
Card 4:   Future influences.
Card 5:   External influences.
Card 6:   The querent's attitude.
Card 7:   Helpful energies.
Card 8:   Obstacles to be overcome.
Card 9:   Hope and fears.
Card 10:  Final result.

